Adding Settings Registry section to the User Guide (#1623)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/user-guide/settings/az-console-how-to-use-settings-registry.md

---
description: Describes how to execute AZ Console Commands using the Settings Registry
title: Using AZ::Conosle to access the Settings Registry
linktitle: Using AZ::Conosle to access the Settings Registry
weight: 400
---

Preamble
========

The AZ::Console has been extended with support for the Settings Registry to allow invoking console commands via setting a JSON value underneath a specific key in the Settings Registry.

> The AZ::Console hooks into the Settings Registry Notification System as well as the JSON Patching Reporting system in order to detect changes to Settings Registry keys underneath the JSON object of "/Amazon/AzCore/Runtime/ConsoleCommands" and "/O3DE/Autoexec/ConsoleCommands"

Author: Actually this isn't related to backwards compatibility.
Both keys have two purposes.
Any console command specified under the key of "/O3DE/Autoexec/ConsoleCommands" are merged into the aggregate `bootstrap.game.<config>.setreg` by the AssetProcessor when processing the assets for the launcher.

A console command specified under the key of "/Amazon/AzCore/Runtime/ConsoleCommands" are are not merged into the aggregate `bootstrap.game<config>.setreg` and are treated as a not persisting beyond the running application.

> Where to place a console command depends on whether the user desires the console command should be merged to the bootstrap.game.\<config>.\<platform>.setreg file and therefore in the GameLauncher/ServerLauncher

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where to place a console command depends on if the user wants the console command to be merged into the bootstrap.game.\<config>.\<platform>.setreg file and how it should be accessed by the GameLauncher/ServerLauncher.
```

unsure about `and therefore in the GameLauncher/ServerLauncher` as it seems like a trailing sentence and nothing below talks about the launchers specifically.

Author: Yeah this should explain that adding console commands to a file with the scheme of "<filename>.clients.setreg" will execute only in the GameLauncher(Should be called ClientLauncher, but whatever).
Having a file of "<filename>.servers.setreg" will execute only in the ServerLauncher.

Confusingly having a file called "<filename>.game.setreg" will execute in both the **Game**Launcher and ServerLauncher.

If GameLauncher was called ClientLauncher it wouldn't be as confusing.

SettingsRegistry ConsoleCommand key differences

`/Amazon/AzCore/Runtime/ConsoleCommands` - ConsoleCommands underneath this object is NOT merged to the bootstrap.game.\<config>.\<platform>.setreg

`/O3DE/Autoexec/ConsoleCommands` - ConsoleCommands underneath this object is merged into the bootstrap.game.\<config>.\<platform>.setreg and therefore will execute in the GameLauncher/ServerLauncher

> Running Console Commands from a file

Reviewer: Should this section mention about when these commands are run in the console lifecycle?

Author: Yeah I can add an explanation about deferred console commands and when they run.

Config file with Console Commands(\*.cfg)
-----------------------------------------

**user.cfg**

```ini
testInit = 3
testInit 3
testBool true
testChar Q
testUInt64 18446744073709551615
testFloat 1.0
testDouble 2
testString Stable
ConsoleSettingsRegistryFixture.testClassFunc Foo Bar Baz
```

Settings Registry Merge Patch file with Console Commands(\*.setreg)
-------------------------------------------------------------------

**user.setreg**

```json
{
    "Amazon": {
        "AzCore": {
            "Runtime": {
                "ConsoleCommands": {
                    "testInit": 3,
                    "testBool": true,
                    "testChar": "Q",
                    "testUInt64": 18446744073709551615,
                    "testFloat": 1.0,
                    "testDouble": 2,
                    "testString": "Stable",
                    "ConsoleSettingsRegistryFixture.testClassFunc": "Foo Bar Baz"
                }
            }
        }
    },
    "O3DE": {
        "Autoexec": {
            "ConsoleCommands": {

>                 "LoadLevel": "path/to/level.spawnable",

Reviewer: These do not appear to be from user.cfg above, so either omit or provide some context.

Author: Or I can just add them to add the examples including the .cfg example

This particular section is how configuring for the game launcher and a release scenario, so that the level is automatically loaded and the launcher doesn't try to connect to the AP.

            }
        }
    }
}
```

Settings Registry Patch file with Console Commands(\*.setregpatch)
------------------------------------------------------------------

**user.setregpatch**

```json
[
    { "op": "add", "path": "/O3DE/Autoexec/ConsoleCommands/testInit", "value": 3 },
    { "op": "add", "path": "/O3DE/Autoexec/ConsoleCommands/testBool", "value": true },
    { "op": "add", "path": "/O3DE/Autoexec/ConsoleCommands/testChar", "value": "Q" },
    { "op": "add", "path": "/O3DE/Autoexec/ConsoleCommands/testUInt64", "value": 18446744073709551615 },
    { "op": "add", "path": "/O3DE/Autoexec/ConsoleCommands/testFloat", "value": 1.0 },
    { "op": "add", "path": "/O3DE/Autoexec/ConsoleCommands/testDouble", "value": 2 },
    { "op": "add", "path": "/O3DE/Autoexec/ConsoleCommands/testString", "value": "Stable" },
    { "op": "add", "path": "/O3DE/Autoexec/ConsoleCommands/ConsoleSettingsRegistryFixture.testClassFunc", "value": "Foo Bar Baz" },
    { "op": "add", "path": "/O3DE/Autoexec/ConsoleCommands/LoadLevel", "value": "levels/levelname/levelname.spawnable" },
    { "op": "add", "path": "/O3DE/Autoexec/ConsoleCommands/bg_ConnectToAssetProcessor", "value": true }
]
```

> Ex. Executing Console Commands from a config or Settings Registry file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Executing Console Commands from a config or Settings Registry file**
```

----------------------------------------------------------------------

> Config files as well Settings Registry files with the preceding content be executed using a single ExecuteConfigFile function in the AZ Console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Config files, as well Settings Registry files with the preceding content, can be executed using a single ExecuteConfigFile function in the AZ Console
```

**Executing Console Commands**

```c++
auto console = AZ::Interface<AZ::IConsole>::Get();
console.ExecuteConfigFile(<path to [user.cfg|user.setreg|user.setregpatch]>);
```

Order in which ConsoleCommands are executed from a single file

Console commands within a specific config or settings registry file are executed in the order they appear in those files from top to bottom.

Here is an example of executing three console commands using the JSON Merge Patch syntax

**Ordering snippet**

```json
{
    "O3DE": {
        "Autoexec": {
            "ConsoleCommands": {
                "testInit": 3,
                "testBool": true,
                "testChar": "Q"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Those commands would execute in order that were seen in the JSON file(testInit → testBool → testChar)

Running Console Commands via updating a value within the Settings Registry
==========================================================================

Running console commands can also be done via modifying keys within the Settings Registry, that are under the "/O3DE/Autoexec/ConsoleCommands" JSON object

> Ex. Using the Settings Registry to modify the "t\_scale" CVar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the Settings Registry to modify the `t_scale` CVar
```

-------------------------------------------------------------

**CVar Modification**

```c++
//! The AZ::IConsole::ConsoleAutoexecCommandKey variable is set to the Settings Registry Console commands root key:
//! "/O3DE/Autoexec/ConsoleCommands"
using FixedValueString = AZ::SettingsRegistryInterface::FixedValueString;
constexpr auto tScaleCVar = FixedValueString(AZ::IConsole::ConsoleRootCommandKey) + "/t_scale;
auto SettingsRegistry = AZ::SettingsRegistry::Get();
settingsRegistry->Set(tScaleCVar, "0.5");
```

Timing of when Console Commands are invoked
===========================================

The ComponentApplication loads .setreg(patch) files before any Gem Modules are loaded or activated in [ComponentApplication::Create](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/development/Code/Framework/AzCore/AzCore/Component/ComponentApplication.cpp#L628-L636).

> The ComponentApplication also supports executing the "user.cfg" in the asset cache after Gem Modules are loaded, but before they activate. This can be seen in [ComponentApplication::CreateCommon](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/stabilization/2110/Code/Framework/AzCore/AzCore/Component/ComponentApplication.cpp#L692-L702).

Reviewer: nit: avoid code links to stabilization branch, should point to last known release or dev. Be consistent with code links (ie pick last release or dev for all links(

Author: I'll update this to point to permalink in the development branch

Any console commands that can not execute due to the Console Commands not being available due to the gems that define them not being loaded, adds those commands to a [deferred console command queue](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/development/Code/Framework/AzCore/AzCore/Console/Console.cpp#L612-L628).
When gems are loaded, any "deferred console commands" attempt to be [dispatched again at that point](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/stabilization/2110/Code/Framework/AzCore/AzCore/Module/Module.h#L98-L113). Any commands that succeed are removed from the queue, while failed commands remain in [Console::ExecuteDeferredCommands](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/development/Code/Framework/AzCore/AzCore/Console/Console.cpp#L177-L186).

> This guarantees that any console commands that are invoked before gems that define them are loaded, will be executed when those gems loaded.

Author: Well the commands within config files can be executed in any out of order to do this.

---
description: Describes how to run AZ Console Commands using the Settings Registry
title: Using AZ::Console to access the Settings Registry
linktitle: Using AZ::Console to access the Settings Registry
weight: 400
---

Preamble
========

> The AZ::Console has been extended with support for the Settings Registry to allow you to initiate console commands by setting a JSON value underneath a specific key in the Settings Registry.  

Author: I'll add the link

```json
{
    "O3DE": {
        "Autoexec": {
            "ConsoleCommands": {
                "testInit": 3,
                "testBool": true,
                "testChar": "Q"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Those commands would run in the order that they appear  in the JSON file(testInit → testBool → testChar).

Running Console Commands via updating a value within the Settings Registry
==========================================================================

You can also run Console commands by modifying keys within the Settings Registry that are under the "/O3DE/Autoexec/ConsoleCommands" JSON object.

**Using the Settings Registry to modify the `t_scale` CVar**
-------------------------------------------------------------

**CVar Modification**

```c++
//! The AZ::IConsole::ConsoleAutoexecCommandKey variable is set to the Settings Registry Console commands root key:
//! "/O3DE/Autoexec/ConsoleCommands"
using FixedValueString = AZ::SettingsRegistryInterface::FixedValueString;
constexpr auto tScaleCVar = FixedValueString(AZ::IConsole::ConsoleRootCommandKey) + "/t_scale;
auto SettingsRegistry = AZ::SettingsRegistry::Get();
settingsRegistry->Set(tScaleCVar, "0.5");
```

> Timing of when Console commands are invoked

Author: Time to do a pass to have all references be "Console Commands" then

Any console commands that cannot run immediately will be added to a [deferred console command queue](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/6d5a045386e20bc0d587007a65cf32f5b33baadd/Code/Framework/AzCore/AzCore/Console/Console.cpp#L612-L628).  
When Gems are eventually loaded, any "deferred console commands" will attempt to be [dispatched again at that point](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/6d5a045386e20bc0d587007a65cf32f5b33baadd/Code/Framework/AzCore/AzCore/Module/Module.h#L113).  
Any commands that succeed are removed from the queue, while failed commands remain in the [queue](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/6d5a045386e20bc0d587007a65cf32f5b33baadd/Code/Framework/AzCore/AzCore/Console/Console.cpp#L177-L186).

This guarantees that Console commands are still invoked even if the Gems that define them are loaded afterwards.
Reference: [https://github.com/o3de/o3de/issues/2062](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/issues/2062)

> ### Info: Console commands that are deferred might not run in the same order as they would have in relation to immediate Console commands

Author: I agree it does look a bit odd.
I am unclear though, about the suggestion to switch to the header 3 when using the deferred commands?

Honestly I was looking for something similar to the Info block in [confluence](https://confluence.atlassian.com/doc/files/51872369/1005333587/1/1589961784921/note-macro-view.png), but I don't think markdown supports such formatting.
